  Good evening, everyone.  Thank you so much for joining us tonight.  But more than that, thank you for the kindness, friendship and support that you've shown us since we've begun this long journey together.  We wouldn't be here without your help, and that means so much to me and Joe.

Joe and I are thrilled, and I know you feel the same way, to have Barack Obama as our President for another four years -- (applause) -- and Michelle as First Lady.  (Applause.)  And I may be a little biased, but I couldn't think of a better man than my husband to help our President lead our country for the next four years.  (Applause.)  As long as he has the privilege of serving this nation, I know that Joe will keep fighting for American people every day. 

Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in welcoming my husband, our Vice President, Joe Biden.  (Applause.)

I'm going to move this away, baby. 

Hello, I'm Jill Biden's husband, and I'm delighted to be with you all here.  (Laughter.)  Let me begin with the simplest of statements:  Thank you.  (Applause.)  Thank you, thank you, thank you.  You're the only reason that we are here.  Thank you for your support.  Thank you for being here.  And most of all, thank you for believing in us. 

Ladies and gentlemen, I've been honored to serve as Vice President.  But I've been especially honored to serve as Barack Obama's Vice President.  (Applause.)  This man has already done an absolutely remarkable job:  Historic health care reform, two Supreme Court appointees -- Justice Sonya Sotomayor and Elaine Kagan -- ending the war in Iraq and about to end the war in Afghanistan -- (applause) -- and stating forthrightly his support for marriage equality.  (Applause.)  And I want you to know something else about this guy Barack Obama -- he's just getting started.  He's just getting started.  (Applause.)

In the weeks and months ahead, we're going to reduce gun violence here in America.  (Applause.)  We're going to pass comprehensive immigration reform.  (Applause.)  And we're going to put this nation's economy on a sustainable path to the future.

Ladies and gentlemen, it's my great honor to introduce you to a magnificent, a truly magnificent First Lady Michelle Obama, and the guy she hangs out with -- my friend, President Barack Obama.  (Applause.)

 Hey.  (Laughter and applause.)  I thought you weren't coming out.  (Laughter.)  I thought you weren't coming.  (Laughter.)

  Hi, everybody.  (Applause.)  Excuse our tardiness.  But you know what, when Stevie Wonder has a few words to say to you -- (laughter) -- you don't rush Stevie Wonder.  (Laughter.)  So pardon our delay, but thank you.  Thanks so much, Jill.  Thank you for that kind introduction.  But more importantly, thank you for your leadership and service.  (Applause.)

I love Joe Biden.  (Applause.)  I love Jill a little bit more.  (Laughter.)  But I want to thank you both for making this journey so much more fun.  Our families have bonded and this has just been a phenomenal four years.  And I'm ready to do four more with both of you.  (Applause.)

  Four more.

  Four more.

And most of all, I want to thank all of you here tonight for everything -- everything -- that you've done to bring this Inauguration to life.  This weekend has been such a wonderful celebration for our people and for the future.  And we know that none of it could have happened without all of you.  And that's why it was so important for all of us to be here and to spend some time with you.
 
So this weekend, as we look ahead to the next four years, we should absolutely take some time to truly enjoy this next few days.  I mean, the last one was kind of fast.  (Laughter.)  So we've all agreed that we're going to take some time to just breathe in and enjoy it.

But let's also remember that this Inauguration is about more than all of the events that we will all enjoy this weekend.  It's about more than swearing in a President.  It's about more than we accomplish together over the next four years.  It's also about the opportunities we have to make a real difference in people's lives.  (Applause.)  I mean, the truth is it's about our opportunity to continue to lift up our families, to help more of our children achieve their dreams, and to put our country on a solid foundation not just for these next few years, but for generations to come.

So tonight, let us re-dedicate ourselves to that work.  Let us keep building on the progress that we've made.  And let's keep working and fighting and pushing forward --

  Forward.

  Forward. (Applause.) 

  Forward.

  -- forward to make the real changes that's happened. 

And that's what this man, my husband, has been doing for these last four years.  (Applause.)  And let me tell you, it has just been a true thrill to watch this handsome, charming -- (laughter) -- individual grow into the man and the President that he is.  We have seen him every single day -- his integrity, his character, his sense of humor -- (laughter) -- his compassion, his courage.  And no matter what the obstacles, we have seen him be so steady facing the challenges that lie ahead and, as always, held true to one unwavering belief -- and that is that we love this country, and we can all work together to change it. 

So, ladies and gentlemen, it is my distinct honor and pleasure to welcome the love of my life and our President for the next four years, Barack Obama.  (Applause.)

  Good evening.  Now, first of all, I love Michelle Obama.  (Applause.)  And to address the most significant event of this weekend, I love her bangs.  (Laughter and applause.)  She looks good.  She always looks good.

You know, as President, you make a lot of important decisions.  Probably the most important decision is who is going to be your partner during the course of your presidency.  And there have been some decisions I got right, some maybe folks might question.  But one decision I know was absolutely correct, absolutely spot on, was my choice of Vice President.  I could not have a better partner than Joe Biden.  And Joe Biden couldn't have a better partner than Dr. Jill Biden.  (Applause.)  We love these folks.  Give them a round of applause.  (Applause.) 

Now, some of you may have heard the story of Andrew Jackson's inaugural reception.  Party-goers got so rowdy they broke several thousands of dollars' worth of White House china.  (Laughter.)  So my first big thank-you tonight is to the National Building Museum for hosting us here.  (Laughter.) 

I also want to thank The Source for their outstanding entertainment, the U.S. Navy Sea Chanters -- (applause) -- and a guy who has been known to make pretty good music, Mr. Stevie Wonder.  (Applause.) 

I'm delivering another speech tomorrow so tonight I'm going to be pretty brief, because there are a limited amount of good lines and you don't want to use them all up tonight.  (Laughter.) My main purpose tonight is just to say thank you. 

As I look out on the room, we've got people from every walk of life, every corner and nook and cranny of this country, every state, every city, every suburb -- people who have invested so much heart, soul, time, money, energy.  One of the things that made this campaign unique was the degree of investment and ownership people had in this common project of ours, because you understood this was not just about a candidate; it was not just about Joe Biden or Barack Obama.  This was about us, who we are as a nation, what values we cherish, how hard we're willing to fight to make sure that those values live not just for today but for future generations.

All of you here understood and were committed to the basic notion that when we put our shoulders to the wheel of history, it moves.  (Applause.)  It moves.  It moves forward.  And that's part of what we celebrate when we come together for Inauguration.

Yesterday, Americans in all 50 states took part in a National Day of Service.  Tomorrow, hundreds of thousands will join us in the National Mall.  And what the Inauguration reminds us of is the role we have as fellow citizens in promoting a common good even as we carry out our individual responsibilities -- the sense that there's something larger than ourselves that gives shape and meaning to our lives. 

The theme of this year's Inauguration is “Our people and our future.”  And throughout my career, what's always given me energy and inspiration and hope, what's allowed me to stand up when I've been knocked down, are folks like you -- the decency, the goodness, the resilience, the neighborliness, the patriotism, the sense of duty, the sense of responsibility of the American people.  You have inspired me throughout. 

And so whenever I think about the challenges that Joe and I and Jill and Michelle face, we know that we stand amongst friends and colleagues and fellow citizens, and that the work is not just ours, that we are working together. 

So I just want to say thank you.  Thank you very much.  Thank you.  (Applause.)  And I want all of you to know that even as we celebrate over the next couple of days -- and feel free to stay up as late as you want.  Tomorrow is not a school night.  Make sure to bundle up -- although it won't be as cold as it was four years ago.  (Laughter.)  Make sure you know that what we're celebrating is not the election or swearing-in of a President;  What we're doing is celebrating each other, and celebrating this incredible nation that we call home.  (Applause.) 

And after we celebrate, let's make sure to work as hard as we can to pass on an America that is worthy not only of our past but also of our future.  (Applause.) 

God bless you guys.  I love you.  We'll see you tomorrow.  (Applause.)

 Hello, everyone! (Applause.) Thank you for that wonderful introduction, Jaelen. I'm so proud of Jaelen, and I know you brought some other kids from Lee Hall Elementary. It's so good to see all of you. (Applause.) Oh, they're over there. And I want to thank your mom and your whole family for their service to our country.

J.R. Martinez, it is always wonderful to see you. Thank you for your service and all that you continue to do for our military families. The First Lady and I are so excited to be here with all these military kids.

I want to give a special welcome to some very brave kids from the Delaware Army National Guard 153rd Military Police Company. (Applause.) Just a few weeks ago, I was with them when their moms or dads were deployed to Afghanistan. I want you all to know that we are so proud of you and we will be here for you while your moms and dads are away.

The First Lady and I knew from the start that we wanted to celebrate the strength and service of our military families. That's why we started Joining Forces -- our effort to encourage all Americans to find ways to honor and support our troops, veterans and military families. Joining Forces is especially important to me because I know something about being a military mom. Our son Beau is a major in the Delaware Army National Guard, and he was deployed to Iraq for a year. Beau has two children, Natalie and Hunter, so I know -- (applause) -- thank you -- so I know firsthand just how important it is for a child to have everyone's support -- their friends, their teachers, and their entire community -- when mom or dad is away.

So we want tonight to be one special way that our country shows all of you just how much we appreciate everything you're doing for our country. And we are so excited to be here with you tonight, here with everyone.

Now I would like to introduce someone else who is so proud of you and excited to be here. She's been working so hard for military families. Please welcome my great friend and partner, First Lady Michelle Obama. (Applause.)

 Wow. Thank you so much. Thank you, Jill. Big hand to Jill, my partner. (Applause.) How is everybody doing? (Applause.) Are you guys having fun? (Applause.) Are you excited to be here for the inauguration? (Applause.) Well, we are all excited that you could join us tonight, both here in Washington and from all across the country and around the world by video.

We've got kids from Fort Hood that are here. (Applause.) We've got folks who have joined us from Joint Base Pearl Harbor-Hickam. They're in the house. (Applause.) We have folks from Wright-Patterson Air Force Base here. (Applause.) We've got folks from Camp Pendleton who are here with us. (Applause.) And we've got Coast Guard Air Station Clearwater here as well. (Applause.) Yes!

And for the wonderful kids from Naval Air Station Sigonella who led the Pledge of Allegiance -- (applause) -- yes! -- we have some very special guests that are here as well -- your parents! (Applause.) Those are your parents. So let's give them a round of applause. We've beamed them in. (Applause.) They're right there. Wave to them. They can see you. (Applause.)

Now, inauguration is a pretty big deal. The President and the Vice President are sworn in. There are all these inaugural balls, everybody dresses up and dances. We had a wonderful day of service today, and hundreds of thousands of people come from all 50 states to join in the celebration. And let me tell you, I love every single minute of it. Every single minute. But I have to tell you that my very favorite part of this entire weekend is being right here with all of you. (Applause.) Absolutely. Because for me, this is what inauguration is all about. It's about celebrating who we are as Americans and all the things that make this country so great. And when I think about who we are, when I think about what makes America great, I think about all of you --our men and women in uniform, our military spouses, and our amazing military kids.

And that's why Jill and I wanted to host this event. And we're not the only ones that wanted to pay tribute to all of you today. You see, when we said we wanted to host a concert to honor our military kids, let me tell you, everyone wanted to be here. Usher wanted to be here. (Applause.) Katy Perry wanted to be here. (Applause.) Nick Cannon, the folks from Glee, and all the other amazing performers -- they wanted to be here, too. (Applause.) And let me tell you, they're not here for me. They're not here for Dr. Biden. They are here for all of you. Because they know the kind of sacrifices that you all make every single day.

Let me just share something. Did you know that the -- that a military kid attends an average of six to nine schools by the time he or she graduates from high school? I mean, just think about that. Just imagine how much courage it takes to always be the new kid -- to walk through the doors of a new school every couple of years; to have to make new friends again and again. And did you know that our men and women in uniform often have to be away from their families for months, sometimes years.

Just think about the level of maturity that is required for military kids during those times, just think about that. Think about how they have to step up at home without even being asked -- taking out the trash when dad's not there; helping brothers and sisters with their homework when mom is away.

Think about how hard it is for military kids to be apart from the people they love most, how they miss their moms and dads every day and would do anything to have them back home. And that's just a glimpse of what it means to be a military kid. It means always thinking about things that are so much bigger than yourself. It means growing up just a little faster and working just a little harder than other kids. And it means doing the greatest thing you can ever do with your life at such a young age, and that is to serve our country.

So to America's military kids, let me tell you, make no mistake about it, you all are an important part of the greatest military on Earth. (Applause.) By supporting your families, you all are helping to protect this country and keep every single one of us safe. You're doing that. And Dr. Biden and I are so incredibly proud of you all. Every day, we're proud of you. Let me tell you, our husbands are proud -- the Vice President, the President -- they are proud of you.

And in the coming years, as these wars draw to an end and we draw down our troops, I want you all to know --(applause) -- absolutely -- but here's the thing: I want you to know, you and your families to know that we will not be drawing down our work to support you. We will be doing just the opposite, because the fact is that today we have a greater obligation to serve you than ever before. And we will do everything in our power, everything to meet that obligation to make sure that our military families get the benefits they've earned and the support and recognition you all deserve.

So in the coming months and years through Joining Forces, Dr. Biden and I, we will keep calling on Americans to translate the love and pride that we all feel into action that makes a real difference for you and your families. Every single one of us has a role to play here. And I encourage everyone watching tonight to go to JoiningForces.gov and find out how you can give back to our military families. Because we cannot rest, no, we cannot be satisfied until we are serving all of you as well as you've served this country. You all deserve nothing less.

And with that, there is someone else here tonight who would like to show her appreciation for you all. She is our final performer for this evening. Should we bring her out? Are you ready? (Applause.) Are you really ready? (Applause.) All right, then. It is now my pleasure to introduce the fabulous Katy Perry!

  Hello, everybody!  Well, this is a good-looking crew here.  (Applause.)  First of all, we just want to acknowledge Burrville Elementary School -- (applause) -- and the principal here, Tui Roper, who is doing outstanding work.  (Applause.)  If you see Tui, you may think she's a student, but no, she's the principal. 

     As I look around the room, I see friends from all across the country, people who have been such great supporters of ours, but more importantly, everybody here -- adults to children -- understand the importance of giving back.  And as we think about not so much Inauguration, but we think about the fact that this is Dr. King's birthday that we're going to be celebrating this weekend, I'm always reminded that he said, everybody wants to be first, everybody wants to be a drum major; but if you're going to be a drum major, be a drum major for service, be a drum major for justice, be a drum major for looking out for other people.  (Applause.)

     And organizations like City Year -- (applause) -- the Corporation for National Service -- (applause) -- all the great work that's being done day in, day out shows that there's a huge hunger on the part of young people to get involved and to get engaged.  And it was interesting -- we were talking to one of the young people, I was staining a shelf --

       He did a fine job.

       And Michelle says I did a fine job.  (Laughter and applause.)  And one of the City Year folks, I was talking to them, I said, how'd you get involved, they said, our parents every holiday we'd always do service and so I was taught at a very young age.  So the fact that we've got some outstanding young people here today, I want to say thank you to the parents for showing early on to all our young people how gratifying and how fulfilling this is. 

This is really what America is about.  This is what we celebrate.  This Inauguration we're going to be -- it's a symbol of how our democracy works and how we peacefully transfer power, but it should also be an affirmation that we're all in this together and that we've got to look out for each other and work hard on behalf of each other.

     So we're thrilled that all of you are here.  We hope you guys are having a great time.  (Applause.)  I hear reports that the very young people did some really good work and some of the older folks like me, who it hurt getting our knees kind of bending down a little bit, we were able to manage also, and somehow Michelle looked stylish the whole time she was doing it.  (Applause.) 

     So, Mich, you want to say a few words?

       You all, thank you so much.  It's wonderful to have such great turnout for this day of service.  And I know that we have a lot of family members in the audience -- (applause) -- and we always force our family, when they come up and do something really cool, they have to serve and they do it happily.  So I'm proud of our families for always being there for us.  We love you guys. 

     So as Barack said, this is a weekend of celebration, but through it all we have to remember that the reason why we're here, why we're standing here, why we're able to celebrate this weekend is because a lot of people worked hard and supported us.  And we've got a job to do.  And this is a symbol of the kind of work that we need to be doing for the next four years and beyond. 

(Loud crash.)

  That was a cameraman.

  That was the press.  This is press.  (Laughter.)  It's okay, though, it's okay.  Hope you didn't break it.  (Laughter.)

So for all the young people, and we've got a lot of young people -- City Year members, the students here at this school -- as Barack says, we're passing the baton onto you all.  So the goal is, is that as you make your way through life, who are you pulling up behind you?  And as long as you're pulling somebody up behind you, you're doing the right thing.

So thank you all.  We're very proud of you and we're going to come down and shake some hands. 

Hi, everybody. This week, I announced a series of concrete steps we should take to protect our children and our communities from gun violence.

These proposals grew out of meetings Vice President Biden and his task force held over the last month with more than 200 different groups – from parents and teachers; to law enforcement and sportsmen; to religious leaders and mental health professionals.

And in the weeks ahead, I will do everything in my power to make them a reality. Because while we may not be able to prevent every senseless act of violence in this country, if there is even one thing we can do to reduce it – if even one life can be saved – we've got an obligation to try.

My administration is taking a series of actions right away – from strengthening our background check system, to helping schools hire more resource officers if they want them, to directing the Centers for Disease Control to study the best ways to reduce gun violence.

But the truth is, making a real and lasting difference also requires Congress to act – and act soon.

First, it's time for Congress to require a universal background check for anyone trying to buy a gun. The law already requires licensed gun dealers to perform these checks, but as many as 40% of all gun purchases are conducted without one. That's not safe, it's not smart, and it's not fair to responsible gun buyers or sellers. An overwhelming majority of Americans agree that anyone trying to buy a gun should at least have to prove they're not a felon, or someone legally prohibited from owning one. That's just common sense.

Second, Congress should restore a ban on military-style assault weapons, and a 10-round limit for magazines. Many assault rifles, when combined with high-capacity magazines, have one purpose and one purpose only: to fire as many bullets as possible as quickly as possible. These weapons have no place in our communities. And a majority of the American people agree with me.

Finally, Congress needs to make it easier, rather than harder, for law enforcement to do its job. We should get tougher on people who buy guns only to turn around and sell them to criminals. And at a time when many communities have been forced to make cuts to their police force, we should put more cops back on the job and back on the street.

Like most Americans, I believe the Second Amendment guarantees an individual right to bear arms. We have a strong tradition of gun ownership in this country, and the vast majority of gun owners act responsibly.

But I also believe most gun owners agree that we can respect the Second Amendment while keeping an irresponsible, law-breaking few from causing harm on a massive scale. That's what these reforms are designed to do. 

None of this will be easy. Already, we're seeing pundits, politicians, and special-interest lobbyists calling any attempt at commonsense reform an all-out assault on liberty – not because that's true, but because that's how they get higher ratings and make more money. And behind the scenes, they're doing everything they can to protect the status quo.

But this time, it can't be up to them. It's got to be up to you. If, like me, you want this time to be different, then I need your help to make it different. Ask your Member of Congress if they support universal background checks and renewing a ban on military-style assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.  And if the answer is no, ask them why not. Ask them why an A-grade from the gun lobby is more important than keeping kids safe in a first grade classroom. 

Since the tragedy in Newtown, I've gotten letters from all over the country – including many from our young people. One of them was from 8-year-old Rachel, who lives in Brooklyn, New York. She wrote: “Please do something so that bad people cannot get guns to kill other people. Children should be safe, especially in school.”

Rachel is counting on us. Let's get this done for her, and let's make this country a safer place for all our children to learn and grow. 

Thanks, and have a great weekend.

  Before I begin today, let me say to the families of the innocents who were murdered 33 days ago, our heart goes out to you.  And you show incredible courage -- incredible courage -- being here.  And the President and I are going to do everything in our power to honor the memory of your children and your wives with the work we take up here today.

It's been 33 days since the nation's heart was broken by the horrific, senseless violence that took place at Sandy Hook Elementary School -- 20 -- 20 beautiful first-graders gunned down in a place that's supposed to be their second sanctuary.  Six members of the staff killed trying to save those children.  It's literally been hard for the nation to comprehend, hard for the nation to fathom.

And I know for the families who are here that time is not measured in days, but it's measured in minutes, in seconds, since you received that news.  Another minute without your daughter. Another minute without your son.  Another minute without your wife.  Another minute without your mom.

I want to personally thank Chris and Lynn McDonald, who lost their beautiful daughter, Grace, and the other parents who I had a chance to speak to, for their suggestions and for -- again, just for the courage of all of you to be here today.  I admire the grace and the resolve that you all are showing.  And I must say I've been deeply affected by your faith, as well.  And the President and I are going to do everything to try to match the resolve you've demonstrated. 

No one can know for certain if this senseless act could have been prevented, but we all know we have a moral obligation -- a moral obligation -- to do everything in our power to diminish the prospect that something like this could happen again.

As the President knows, I've worked in this field a long time -- in the United States Senate, having chaired a committee that had jurisdiction over these issues of guns and crime, and having drafted the first gun violence legislation -- the last gun violence legislation, I should say.  And I have no illusions about what we're up against or how hard the task is in front of us.  But I also have never seen the nation's conscience so shaken by what happened at Sandy Hook.  The world has changed, and it's demanding action.

It's in this context that the President asked me to put together, along with Cabinet members, a set of recommendations about how we should proceed to meet that moral obligation we have.  And toward that end, the Cabinet members and I sat down with 229 groups -- not just individuals, representing groups -- 229 groups from law enforcement agencies to public health officials, to gun officials, to gun advocacy groups, to sportsmen and hunters and religious leaders.  And I've spoken with members of Congress on both sides of the aisle, had extensive conversations with mayors and governors and county officials. 

And the recommendations we provided to the President on Monday call for executive actions he could sign, legislation he could call for, and long-term research that should be undertaken. They're based on the emerging consensus we heard from all the groups with whom we spoke, including some of you who are victims of this god-awful occurrence -- ways to keep guns out of the wrong hands, as well as ways to take comprehensive action to prevent violence in the first place. 

We should do as much as we can, as quickly as we can.  And we cannot let the perfect be the enemy of the good.  So some of what you will hear from the President will happen immediately; some will take some time.  But we have begun.  And we are starting here today and we're going to resolve to continue this fight.

During the meetings that we held, we met with a young man who's here today -- I think Colin Goddard is here.  Where are you, Colin?  Colin was one of the survivors of the Virginia Tech massacre.  He was in the classroom.  He calls himself one of the “lucky seven.”  And he'll tell you he was shot four times on that day and he has three bullets that are still inside him. 

And when I asked Colin about what he thought we should be doing, he said, “I'm not here because of what happened to me. I'm here because of what happened to me keeps happening to other people and we have to do something about it.”

Colin, we will.  Colin, I promise you, we will.  This is our intention.  We must do what we can now.  And there's no person who is more committed to acting on this moral obligation we have than the President of the United States of America.

Ladies and gentlemen, President Barack Obama.  (Applause.)

  Thank you, everybody.  Please have a seat.  Good afternoon, everybody. 

Let me begin by thanking our Vice President, Joe Biden, for your dedication, Joe, to this issue, for bringing so many different voices to the table.  Because while reducing gun violence is a complicated challenge, protecting our children from harm shouldn't be a divisive one. 

Over the month since the tragedy in Newtown, we've heard from so many, and, obviously, none have affected us more than the families of those gorgeous children and their teachers and guardians who were lost.  And so we're grateful to all of you for taking the time to be here, and recognizing that we honor their memories in part by doing everything we can to prevent this from happening again.

But we also heard from some unexpected people.  In particular, I started getting a lot of letters from kids.  Four of them are here today -- Grant Fritz, Julia Stokes, Hinna Zeejah, and Teja Goode.  They're pretty representative of some of the messages that I got.  These are some pretty smart letters from some pretty smart young people. 

Hinna, a third-grader -- you can go ahead and wave, Hinna. That's you -- (laughter.)  Hinna wrote, “I feel terrible for the parents who lost their children…I love my country and [I] want everybody to be happy and safe.”

And then, Grant -- go ahead and wave, Grant.  (Laughter.)  Grant said, “I think there should be some changes.  We should learn from what happened at Sandy Hook…I feel really bad.”

And then, Julia said -- Julia, where are you?  There you go -- “I'm not scared for my safety, I'm scared for others.  I have four brothers and sisters and I know I would not be able to bear the thought of losing any of them.”

These are our kids.  This is what they're thinking about.  And so what we should be thinking about is our responsibility to care for them, and shield them from harm, and give them the tools they need to grow up and do everything that they're capable of doing -- not just to pursue their own dreams, but to help build this country.  This is our first task as a society, keeping our children safe.  This is how we will be judged.  And their voices should compel us to change.

And that's why, last month, I asked Joe to lead an effort, along with members of my Cabinet, to come up with some concrete steps we can take right now to keep our children safe, to help prevent mass shootings, to reduce the broader epidemic of gun violence in this country. 

And we can't put this off any longer.  Just last Thursday, as TV networks were covering one of Joe's meetings on this topic, news broke of another school shooting, this one in California.  In the month since 20 precious children and six brave adults were violently taken from us at Sandy Hook Elementary, more than 900 of our fellow Americans have reportedly died at the end of a gun -- 900 in the past month.  And every day we wait, that number will keep growing.

So I'm putting forward a specific set of proposals based on the work of Joe's task force.  And in the days ahead, I intend to use whatever weight this office holds to make them a reality. Because while there is no law or set of laws that can prevent every senseless act of violence completely, no piece of legislation that will prevent every tragedy, every act of evil, if there is even one thing we can do to reduce this violence, if there is even one life that can be saved, then we've got an obligation to try.

And I'm going to do my part.  As soon as I'm finished speaking here, I will sit at that desk and I will sign a directive giving law enforcement, schools, mental health professionals and the public health community some of the tools they need to help reduce gun violence.

We will make it easier to keep guns out of the hands of criminals by strengthening the background check system.  We will help schools hire more resource officers if they want them and develop emergency preparedness plans.  We will make sure mental health professionals know their options for reporting threats of violence -- even as we acknowledge that someone with a mental illness is far more likely to be a victim of violent crime than the perpetrator. 

And while year after year, those who oppose even modest gun safety measures have threatened to defund scientific or medical research into the causes of gun violence, I will direct the Centers for Disease Control to go ahead and study the best ways to reduce it -- and Congress should fund research into the effects that violent video games have on young minds.  We don't benefit from ignorance.  We don't benefit from not knowing the science of this epidemic of violence.

These are a few of the 23 executive actions that I'm announcing today.  But as important as these steps are, they are in no way a substitute for action from members of Congress.  To make a real and lasting difference, Congress, too, must act -- and Congress must act soon.  And I'm calling on Congress to pass some very specific proposals right away.

First:  It's time for Congress to require a universal background check for anyone trying to buy a gun.  (Applause.)   The law already requires licensed gun dealers to run background checks, and over the last 14 years that's kept 1.5 million of the wrong people from getting their hands on a gun.  But it's hard to enforce that law when as many as 40 percent of all gun purchases are conducted without a background check.  That's not safe.  That's not smart.  It's not fair to responsible gun buyers or sellers. 

If you want to buy a gun -- whether it's from a licensed dealer or a private seller -- you should at least have to show you are not a felon or somebody legally prohibited from buying one.  This is common sense.  And an overwhelming majority of Americans agree with us on the need for universal background checks -- including more than 70 percent of the National Rifle Association's members, according to one survey.  So there's no reason we can't do this.

Second:  Congress should restore a ban on military-style assault weapons, and a 10-round limit for magazines.  (Applause.) The type of assault rifle used in Aurora, for example, when paired with high-capacity magazines, has one purpose -- to pump out as many bullets as possible, as quickly as possible; to do as much damage, using bullets often designed to inflict maximum damage. 

And that's what allowed the gunman in Aurora to shoot 70 people -- 70 people -- killing 12 in a matter of minutes.  Weapons designed for the theater of war have no place in a movie theater.  A majority of Americans agree with us on this. 

And, by the way, so did Ronald Reagan, one of the staunchest defenders of the Second Amendment, who wrote to Congress in 1994, urging them -- this is Ronald Reagan speaking -- urging them to “listen to the American public and to the law enforcement community and support a ban on the further manufacture of [military-style assault] weapons.”  (Applause.) 

And finally, Congress needs to help, rather than hinder, law enforcement as it does its job.  We should get tougher on people who buy guns with the express purpose of turning around and selling them to criminals.  And we should severely punish anybody who helps them do this.  Since Congress hasn't confirmed a director of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms in six years, they should confirm Todd Jones, who will be -- who has been Acting, and I will be nominating for the post.  (Applause.)

And at a time when budget cuts are forcing many communities to reduce their police force, we should put more cops back on the job and back on our streets.

Let me be absolutely clear.  Like most Americans, I believe the Second Amendment guarantees an individual right to bear arms. I respect our strong tradition of gun ownership and the rights of hunters and sportsmen.  There are millions of responsible, law-abiding gun owners in America who cherish their right to bear arms for hunting, or sport, or protection, or collection. 

I also believe most gun owners agree that we can respect the Second Amendment while keeping an irresponsible, law-breaking few from inflicting harm on a massive scale.  I believe most of them agree that if America worked harder to keep guns out of the hands of dangerous people, there would be fewer atrocities like the one that occurred in Newtown.  That's what these reforms are designed to do.  They're common-sense measures.  They have the support of the majority of the American people. 

And yet, that doesn't mean any of this is going to be easy to enact or implement.  If it were, we'd already have universal background checks.  The ban on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines never would have been allowed to expire.  More of our fellow Americans might still be alive, celebrating birthdays and anniversaries and graduations. 

This will be difficult.  There will be pundits and politicians and special interest lobbyists publicly warning of a tyrannical, all-out assault on liberty -- not because that's true, but because they want to gin up fear or higher ratings or revenue for themselves.  And behind the scenes, they'll do everything they can to block any common-sense reform and make sure nothing changes whatsoever. 

The only way we will be able to change is if their audience, their constituents, their membership says this time must be different -- that this time, we must do something to protect our communities and our kids. 

I will put everything I've got into this, and so will Joe.  But I tell you, the only way we can change is if the American people demand it.  And by the way, that doesn't just mean from certain parts of the country.  We're going to need voices in those areas, in those congressional districts, where the tradition of gun ownership is strong to speak up and to say this is important.  It can't just be the usual suspects.  We have to examine ourselves and our hearts, and ask ourselves what is important. 

This will not happen unless the American people demand it.  If parents and teachers, police officers and pastors, if hunters and sportsmen, if responsible gun owners, if Americans of every background stand up and say, enough; we've suffered too much pain and care too much about our children to allow this to continue -- then change will come.  That's what it's going to take.

In the letter that Julia wrote me, she said, “I know that laws have to be passed by Congress, but I beg you to try very hard.”  (Laughter.)  Julia, I will try very hard.  But she's right.  The most important changes we can make depend on congressional action.  They need to bring these proposals up for a vote, and the American people need to make sure that they do. 

Get them on record.  Ask your member of Congress if they support universal background checks to keep guns out of the wrong hands. Ask them if they support renewing a ban on military-style assault weapons and high-capacity magazines.  And if they say no, ask them why not.  Ask them what's more important -- doing whatever it takes to get a A grade from the gun lobby that funds their campaigns, or giving parents some peace of mind when they drop their child off for first grade?  (Applause.)

This is the land of the free, and it always will be.  As Americans, we are endowed by our Creator with certain inalienable rights that no man or government can take away from us.  But we've also long recognized, as our Founders recognized, that with rights come responsibilities.  Along with our freedom to live our lives as we will comes an obligation to allow others to do the same.  We don't live in isolation.  We live in a society, a government of, and by, and for the people.  We are responsible for each other. 

The right to worship freely and safely, that right was denied to Sikhs in Oak Creek, Wisconsin.  The right to assemble peaceably, that right was denied shoppers in Clackamas, Oregon, and moviegoers in Aurora, Colorado.  That most fundamental set of rights to life and liberty and the pursuit of happiness -- fundamental rights that were denied to college students at Virginia Tech, and high school students at Columbine, and elementary school students in Newtown, and kids on street corners in Chicago on too frequent a basis to tolerate, and all the families who've never imagined that they'd lose a loved one to a bullet -- those rights are at stake.  We're responsible.

When I visited Newtown last month, I spent some private time with many of the families who lost their children that day.  And one was the family of Grace McDonald.  Grace's parents are here. Grace was seven years old when she was struck down -- just a gorgeous, caring, joyful little girl.  I'm told she loved pink. She loved the beach.  She dreamed of becoming a painter. 

And so just before I left, Chris, her father, gave me one of her paintings, and I hung it in my private study just off the Oval Office.  And every time I look at that painting, I think about Grace.  And I think about the life that she lived and the life that lay ahead of her, and most of all, I think about how, when it comes to protecting the most vulnerable among us, we must act now -- for Grace.  For the 25 other innocent children and devoted educators who had so much left to give.  For the men and women in big cities and small towns who fall victim to senseless violence each and every day.  For all the Americans who are counting on us to keep them safe from harm.  Let's do the right thing.  Let's do the right thing for them, and for this country that we love so much.  (Applause.) 

Thank you.  Let's sign these orders.  (Applause.)

(The executive orders are signed.)  (Applause.)

All right, there we go.  (Applause.)

See below for a follow up to a question (marked with an asterisk) posed in the briefing.
 
*On Sunday, the President will place his hand on the Robinson family Bible when he takes the oath of office.  On Monday, the President will place his hand on two Bibles: one from President Lincoln, the other from Dr. King.
 
12:59 P.M. EST
 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen.  Welcome to the White House Briefing Room.  It is very good to see you today.  I have no announcements to make, so I will head straight to the Associated Press. 
 
Q    Jay, on gun violence to start off -- do you expect the President to release these plans tomorrow?  And absent any specifics that you can provide at this point, to what extent can the President address this problem through executive order, and how much of it needs to be addressed through congressional action?
 
:  Thank you for the question.  I can tell you that tomorrow the President and Vice President will hold an event here at the White House to unveil a package of concrete proposals to reduce gun violence and prevent future tragedies like the one in Newtown, Connecticut.  They will be joined by children from around the country who wrote the President letters in the wake of that tragedy expressing their concerns about gun violence and school safety, along with their parents.  That event will be at approximately 11:45 a.m.
 
I will not get ahead of the President in terms of what his package of proposals will include.  I will simply note that the President has made clear that he intends to take a comprehensive approach.  He has also made clear that there are specific legislative actions that he will continue to call on Congress to take, including the assault weapons ban, including a measure to ban high-capacity magazine clips, including an effort to close the very big loopholes in the background check system in our country.  But I will, beyond that, leave it to the President to announce what actions he proposes tomorrow.
 
Q    There's been some fears among gun owners that the President might unilaterally try to restrict their right to bear arms or access to weapons.  Does the President believe that his executive powers give him the authority to restrict someone's right to access certain weapons or ammunition?
 
:  Well, let's be clear.  The President, as he has said often and said yesterday, believes that the Second Amendment guarantees an individual right to bear arms.  He believes and knows that most all gun owners are highly responsible; they buy their guns legally and they use them safely.  He also has seen and believes that most gun owners support the idea of common-sense measures to prevent people who shouldn't have guns from getting them.  And that includes closing loopholes in our background check system, for example.
 
But when it comes to -- the President will take a comprehensive approach.  But it is a simple fact that there are limits on what can be done within existing law.  And Congress has to act on the kinds of measures that we've already mentioned because the power to do that is reserved by Congress and to Congress.
 
So I'm not going to get ahead of the President.  He will announce a series of proposals, but certainly a significant part of what he hopes we together can achieve will have to be done working with Congress.
 
Q    Separate topic, on Egypt:  There are some comments, some anti-Semitic comments that have emerged from President Morsi recently.  He delivered a speech in 2010, in which he instructed Eyptians to “nurse children and our grandchildren on hatred for Jews and Zionists.”  He gave an interview around the same time in which he described Zionists in very insulting and derogatory terms.  Does the President think that President Morsi should retract his comments, offer an apology?  And to your knowledge, has Morsi offered any regrets to the White House over making these comments?
 
:  We strongly condemn the remarks that then-Muslim Brotherhood leader Morsi made in 2010.  The language that we have seen is deeply offensive.  We completely reject the statements, as we do any language that espouses religious hatred. 
This discourse -- and this is a broader point -- this kind of discourse has been acceptable in the region for far too long and is counter to the goal of peace.  President Morsi should make clear that he respects people of all faiths, and that this type of rhetoric is not acceptable or productive in a democratic Egypt. 
 
Since taking office, President Morsi has reaffirmed Egypt's commitment to its peace treaty with Israel in both word and deed, and has proven willing to work with us towards shared objectives, including a cease-fire during the crisis in Gaza last year.  These commitments are essential for our bilateral relations with Egypt, as well as for stability in the region.  But we will always speak out against language that espouses religious hatred or encourages the use of violence.  And we have raised our concerns over these remarks with the government of Egypt. 
 
Q    Does the White House believe, though, that Israelis can trust Morsi to uphold his end of the bargain, given these comments?
 
:  Again, we strongly condemn these comments.  And we believe that President Morsi should make clear that he respects people of all faiths and that this type of rhetoric is unacceptable in a democratic Egypt.  We work with President Morsi towards shared objectives because he is the elected leader of Egypt.  He has demonstrated in word and deed his commitment to Egypt's peace treaty with Israel, and that's significant.  And he obviously worked with us to resolve -- or to achieve a peace settlement -- a ceasefire rather -- in the Gaza conflict last year. 
 
So this is about action.  It's about deeds.  And we believe that language like that is too tolerated in the region and it has been acceptable in the region for too long.  And we strongly condemn it, because it's counter to peace.  It is counter to the long-term interests of everyone in the region who hopes for peace and greater prosperity.
 
Yes, Reuters.
 
Q    Last week, the Vice President met with makers of first-person shooter video games and with the entertainment industry.  And I'm just wondering if the President is going to have a message tomorrow for people in the entertainment industry about their role in the gun violence problem or their -- ways that they could help address it.
 
:  I would ask you to wait for the President's event tomorrow, where he will broadly address the steps forward that he believes we need to take as a nation to try to reduce the scourge of gun violence in this country.  But I don't want to get ahead of the President.  It's certainly correct that the Vice President had that meeting.
 
Q    Aside from legislative -- things that could be addressed through legislation, is there a sense, a building sense, a growing sense of how quickly the administration will be able to move on some of the other pieces of the proposal that can be done without legislation?  And how quickly -- how important is it to move quickly, to sort of not let what happened fade away?
 
:  The President certainly hopes that out of the tragedy of Newtown we can achieve progress towards reducing gun violence in this country.  He believes that we can no longer stand by without taking action, even, as he did yesterday, as he acknowledges that no single thing that we can do will eliminate this problem.  And he acknowledged yesterday that achieving some of the goals that he has already set might be difficult.  Because they're difficult does not mean they should not be pursued.
 
As for timetables, when it comes to congressional action, that obviously depends on Congress.  The President has called for congressional action.  In terms of other measures that he might propose, I would leave it, again, to the President to describe those in greater detail tomorrow and perhaps address the question of timetable and speed tomorrow.
 
Q    What commitment has he gotten from leaders in Congress, particularly from Senator Reid, to work on some of these things?
 
:  I don't have any conversations of that nature to divulge today.  He certainly believes that congressional action is necessary.  There is, I think, a significant amount of interest in moving on these issues, and he will work with members of Congress to try to advance these important initiatives.  In terms of timetables, again, that's a congressional prerogative, but he will certainly be urging Congress to act quickly.
 
Jessica.
 
Q    Following up on that -- thanks, Jay -- Senator Reid has said he doubts whether an assault weapons ban can pass the House. And the Senate will only move on something that can pass the House.  So how frustrating is this for the President?
 
:  I think we will put forward a series of proposals.  The President has made clear that he supports and has long supported a renewal of the assault weapons ban.  We will look to Congress to put together a legislative strategy.  We'll work with them.  And we will push for things that are hard because they're the right things to do.  We're not going to prejudge --
 
Q    But do you think the assault weapons ban is dead before it's started or --
 
:  I don't believe that.  And I think that that doesn't mean it's a sure thing, either.  If these things were easy, they would have been achieved already.  If renewal of the assault weapons ban were easily accomplished, it would not need renewing because it would have happened already.
 
The fact of the matter is the President is committed to pushing these proposals.  He is not naïve about the challenges that exist, but he believes that, as he said yesterday, if even one child's life can be saved by the actions we take here in Washington, we must take those actions. 
 
Q    I know you all chafe at this, but the President is not always very fond of working phones and going up there and --
 
:  Going up there?  Because there is such a long history of Presidents going up there?  (Laughter.)
 
Q    Well, they do.  And they also have people over here.
 
:  I think that's in a television program.  But go ahead.  (Laughter.) 
 
Q    Over our heads, Jay.  Over our heads.
 
:  West Wing -- you know.  Anyway, go ahead. 
 
Q    I'm not going to indulge your West Wing fantasies.  But he could also have them over here, and there are a number of things he can do. I know the history.  My question is how much is he willing to do that to win what he wants on the gun -- on the assault weapons ban and on gun safety in general?  I mean, is this the issue that he'll really break the mold?
 
:  Well, I would start by suggesting that premise is a little off.  But I will simply say that the President is committed to this.  He believes it's a high priority, not just for him but for the country.  And he will push a series of proposals, and I think you will see that clearly when you hear from him tomorrow.  That includes working with Congress to try to get some of these legislative actions done on behalf of the American people.  So I don't think you should doubt the President's commitment to this, and he will work to achieve what can be achieved here.
 
Q    Okay.  So just finally on this, does he have any commitment from Democratic leadership, like Harry Reid, Nancy Pelosi, but especially Harry Reid, that they will push the assault weapons ban?
 
:  Again, I think this was addressed earlier -- the legislative strategy will be something that's worked out with legislative leaders.  The fact is the President is committed to the renewal of the assault weapons ban; a number of senators are committed to it.  I think there are a variety of things that we need to act on legislatively, and the President has already put forward some of those. 
 
In terms of how that plays out, I think we have to wait and see.  But he is committed to acting and you'll -- I mean, I think you've seen something that reflects that, which is the Vice President, at the President's request, took on this task of bringing people together, formulating proposals and recommendations over the holidays and in the midst of a fiscal cliff fight and now other fiscal challenges and debates that we're having with Congress, and did an extraordinary amount of work in order to present to the President a series of recommendations that he could choose from and put forward, which he will do tomorrow.
 
Major.
 
Q    Does the President believe he can achieve his goals of reducing gun violence without an assault weapons ban?
 
:  That's hard to analyze what -- or quantify what that means exactly.  The President will put forward a series of proposals that is not limited to one legislative action.  And I don't think he believes -- I know he doesn't believe that even if everything that he put forward were acted on, made law when it comes to legislative action, or acted on in other ways that we would eliminate gun violence in America.  He understands that that's the case.
 
Q    You know why I ask.
 
:  Well, I think our goal, obviously, should be -- as a country should be never to accept even one child's death as a result of gun violence.  So he believes that the things that we can do as a nation, together, in a bipartisan way when it comes to legislation, together outside of Washington, that, yes, we can reduce gun violence.  But it's something we have to do together. It's something that cannot be done by a President alone.  It can't be done by a single community alone, or a mayor or a governor, or by Congress alone.  We all have to work together.
 
Q    Would he sign a package passed by Congress that did not include the assault weapons ban?
 
:  The President is not saying that any single measure has to be part of -- let's say there are -- I mean, I don't want to quantify the number of actions that he might put forward tomorrow, but he believes we ought to move on all of them, and he's not going to say that we have to move on this one or else we don't move on that one.
 
He believes we should pass legislation that closes loopholes in our background check system.  That's something that I think we've all seen has broad support across the country, among gun owners and non-gun owners, among people in red states and blue states, Democrats and Republicans.  And that's something we should act on because it's very important.  There are a host of measures that we can take that can address this problem, and he believes we should take them as a nation.
 
Q    Just to clarify, on the question of executive orders versus where Congress has to act, there are legitimate constitutional questions and protections in the Second Amendment. And just to make it abundantly clear, nothing that the President will talk about tomorrow on executive orders would touch upon those constitutionally protected Second Amendment rights?
 
:  There are -- first of all, the President of the United States believes that the Second Amendment guarantees an individual's right to bear arms.  He has been explicit about this.  And throughout his time in office, he has made clear that he believes we ought to take common-sense -- and enact common-sense measures that protect our Second Amendment rights but prevent people who should not have weapons from obtaining them.  So his commitment to the Second Amendment I think is very clear.
 
There's a lot of speculation about what actions he might propose tomorrow; we don't have much longer to wait to see what they are.  But his commitment to the Second Amendment is very clear.
 
Q    Let me take you a little farther afield.  What do you think, and what does the President think, and what conversations has he had either with representatives of the French government or anyone else about what's going on in Mali?  What are the U.S. interests there?  What is the degree or level of our cooperation now and in the future with the French and what they're undertaking in Mali?
 
:  I appreciate the question.  The President did speak with President Hollande last week, and we share the French goal of denying terrorists a safe haven in the region, and we support the French operation.  We are supporting the French by sharing information, and we are considering a request for logistical support.  We will stay in close touch with the French government and other international partners as the situation develops.
 
As I think you know, the United Nations Security Council condemned recent attacks by rebel and terrorist groups against Malian government forces, and the government of Mali asked for support.  We call for swift implementation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 2085 to restore stability throughout Mali.  It is also imperative that the transitional government of Mali present a political road map for a return to democratic governance and negotiations with groups that reject terrorism and accept a unified Mali.
 
Q    What's at stake for the United States?
 
:  Look, we work with our international partners to combat al Qaeda-linked groups around the world.  We share an interest with the French in depriving terrorists of a safe haven in North Africa, in a country like Mali, and we work with nations like France and others in that region and around the world to achieve the shared goals that we share -- the goals that we share.  So I think that that is reflected in the actions that we've taken and the support that we have given to the French operation.
 
Q    On the executive orders to be announced tomorrow, how do you address concerns that these are an attempt to go around Congress?
 
:  Again, I think there have been reports about possible items that may be proposed by the President.  Some of those reports have been linked to suggestions and recommendations or conversations that have occurred in the series of meetings that the Vice President has held as part of his effort to consider this issue on behalf of the President.  I would urge you not to make assumptions about what the President will announce tomorrow based on reports that reflect at most an earlier stage of the process.  The President will announce a plan that is the President's plan, and he'll do that tomorrow.
 
Q    That, I don't think, quite answers the question I --
 
:  Well, you made an assertion about what he's going to announce tomorrow, and I'm saying that reports that suggest or speculate or ponder what he might announce are premature.
 
Q    In other words, there may not be executive orders?
 
:  Well, in other words, I'm not going to get specific about what the President will announce tomorrow.  What I have --
 
Q    But what the President is doing tomorrow some people are concerned is an attempt to go around Congress.
 
:  Right.  I think I've answered this several times already in the short time I've been here, which is that the President believes in and supports the Second Amendment.  He also understands that there are limits to what can be achieved without congressional action, which is why he is calling on Congress to act appropriately.
 
Q    The fact that the President can propose or announce administrative actions also suggests that the government hasn't been doing as much as it could have been in the past in terms of enforcement, for example.  How do you address that question?
 
:  The President has made clear that we all need to do more, and we all need to examine our consciences and acknowledge that we have not done enough to protect our children. If we had, some of the tragedies that we've seen in this country, most recently in Connecticut, might not have happened. 
 
So you'll hear from the President tomorrow about the package of proposals he believes are the right ones to help address this problem.  He looks forward to working with Congress.  He looks forward to continuing to work with stakeholders in this issue of all kinds moving forward.
 
This is something that we have to address as a nation.  It's not something you can do alone through executive action.  It's not something you can do with even a series of laws that Congress might pass.  This is a problem that touches on a variety of areas of American life, and it needs to be approached broadly.  And I think that's why the President asked the Vice President to take on this effort.  It's why the Vice President met with so many different groups -- victims groups, gun safety organizations, advocates for sportsmen and sportswomen, gun ownership groups, representatives of the entertainment and video game industries, as well as members of the House of Representatives. 
 
Secretary Duncan met with representatives from parent-teacher and education groups.  Secretary Sebelius met with mental health and disability advocates.  Senior White House officials met with a variety of stakeholders, including medical groups, community organizations, child and family advocates, business owners, faith leaders and others.  And I think that -- the breadth of the effort represents the scope of the problem. 
 
Peter.
 
Q    Perhaps this is following up on a question that was asked a moment before, but to try to pin down a little bit more about what the word "push" means in terms of the President's efforts -- given before the fiscal cliff deadline that he traveled to places like Virginia, Michigan, and Pennsylvania, will he go on the road for the issue of gun violence to try to pursue this campaign?
 
:  I haven't any scheduling announcements to make. The President considers this a priority.  I think that's been made clear by the speed of action that you've seen represented here by both the President and the Vice President.  It will be represented by the event you see tomorrow that the President and the Vice President will hold.  And I will leave it to the President to announce next steps.
 
But he believes we need to act now.  He believes that we need to take steps that prevent, or help prevent the kind of tragic violence against our children, in particular, that we saw in Newtown, Connecticut, and we see in less spectacular form around the country all the time.
 
Q    Yesterday, on the one-month anniversary of the awful shootings at Newtown, the NRA put out a new app that is for children as young as age four, at least according to its rating, on iTunes, that allows children or adults, whoever chooses to, to go to a shooting range and fire.  Given the conversation with the gaming industry taking place, and others, do you think that's appropriate?  Does the President think that's appropriate?
 
:  I have heard about this, but I have not had the conversation with the President about it.  I really -- I haven't seen the app that you're referring to. 
 
Q    Should four-year-olds be -- 
 
:  Well, I think that these are good questions.  And I think some of the answers, we don't know, in terms of what impact and influence apps and videogames and entertainment has.  But that is why the Vice President's group had some of the meetings that it had, and that's why this conversation doesn't end tomorrow.  It continues. 
 
And I think for parents around the country, these are issues that merit examination.  And as a country, these are issues that merit examination.  And some of the issues that are presented here are not ones that are solvable by Washington action, necessarily.  They are more of the nature that bend to the will of community feelings and parental guidance and the like.
 
So, again, I don't know much about the specific issue, but I think, broadly, that's why this issue is so complex.
 
Q    And then finally, very briefly, in an interview that will air later this week, the cyclist Lance Armstrong will admit to doping, using performance-enhancing drugs during the time when he won seven Tour de France championships.  I'm curious, given the fact that just last week we had a Hall of Fame induction where there were zero baseball players inducted, what the President's view is of the state of sports in America today, and if he has any opinion on Lance Armstrong coming forward with these acknowledgements, his admissions.

:  Well, I haven't spoken with him about Lance Armstrong, and I know that there were reports about what he said in this interview, but I haven't seen the interview yet.  What I will say is the President feels very strongly that it's inappropriate to use performance-enhancing drugs, and that any steps that any individual athlete takes or organizations take to reduce their use or eliminate them are good things.  But beyond that, I haven't got a specific reaction.
 
Q    Can I follow up, Jay?
 
:  Okay.
 
Q    Okay, if, in fact, Lance Armstrong admits to doping, would the President consider directing DOJ to investigate whether he violated his agreement with U.S. Postal, and whether any of those payments should be repaid? 
 
:  It's a speculative matter, A; B, it's a speculative matter about a possible legal action.  That's two strikes.  And in this case, you're out.  (Laughter.)  
 
Q    Do you have any update on how the President is preparing for his inaugural address?  Any update for us on what historical texts he might be consulting as he drafts the speech?
 
:  I don't have much for you.  He's obviously thinking about and working on the address he'll give.  It's something he feels very fortunate to have the opportunity to do for a second time.  But beyond that, I just don't have any details for you.
 
Q    Turning back to gun policy in recent days, the President said that just because things are hard doesn't mean they shouldn't be tried.  Is that the kind of tone we can expect to hear from him next week during his speech?
 
:  You mean in the inaugural speech?  Well, I think he was referring to specifically measures to reduce gun violence.  I think broadly speaking, that reflects I think a very American mind-set that says we don't shy away from trying to do hard things because these things are important to do.  But I wouldn't read into that anything about the inaugural address necessarily.
 
It's certainly his view about why it's important to push forward to take common-sense measures to address gun violence. Even if some folks out there are saying they're really hard or they can't be done, we have to try.
 
Jackie.
 
Q    Jay, when it comes to not just gun control but maybe immigration and other issues, how is the President planning to use, if at all, the grassroots network, OFA or some such, to engage the millions who were supporters during the campaign, to help get Congress to act?
 
:  Well, I don't know specifically about that particular network.  I know that the President believes and has learned over the course of his first term that it is vitally important when trying to move forward on an agenda that is both necessary and enjoys popular support that we engage the public.  And that's an approach he has taken for some time now, and I think, broadly speaking, it's an approach he'll continue to take.
 
It's not a question of do you sit down in a room with leaders of Congress, or do you go out and engage the American people.  You do both.  And he has, I think, demonstrated especially for the last two years that that's -- the both-and approach is the approach that's effective, and it's the approach I think you can expect he'll continue to take.
 
Q    It was never that successful in the first term.  The payroll tax cut, a couple other things, but nothing on a large scale.  Is there going to be -- can we expect to see sort of greater use or mobilization of that --
 
:  I think for millions of Americans who saw their payroll tax cut extended, for millions of students who saw their student loan rates kept low, and for virtually all working Americans who saw tax cuts -- their taxes kept low, their income tax rates kept low as a result of the fiscal cliff deal -- for those people, the President's success in using this strategy I think is pretty notable and those are big things -- big things for the American people.
 
Going forward, I think as a general matter, he believes that just because some of the issues that we debate here in Washington can sound arcane, can involve terminology like “raising the debt ceiling,” or “spending in the out-years,” or “entitlement reform,” these are issues that matter deeply to everyday Americans and affect their livelihoods and affect their potential in the American economy.
 
So he thinks the American people care.  He thinks that they want to hear from their leaders in Washington about the things that they're debating here.  And he'll absolutely continue to engage with the American people on the policy proposals that he's putting forward.
 
Q    Can I follow up on that?
 
:  Sure.  If Jackie is finished.  Jackie, do you yield to --
 
Q    I yield to Ari. 
 
Q    Thank you, Jackie.  (Laughter.)  You just said it's not a choice between engaging with Congress or the American people, you do both.  Last summer you said the President had not spoken ever with Senator Marco Rubio about immigration.  Now Rubio has come out and sort of laid out his key points on immigration.  Has the President or anyone senior from the White House spoken with him yet about it?
 
:  Well, Senator Rubio at the time had I think demonstrated and reported absence of support among Republican leaders for even the issues that he was discussing. 
 
The President has put forward -- and there is a blueprint on whitehouse.gov that demonstrates this -- an approach to comprehensive immigration reform that he believes we need to move forward on, and that you can expect him to move forward on in the relatively near future.
 
The fact is we are encouraged -- referring now to recent reports -- that Senator Rubio's thinking, as reported, so closely reflects the President's blueprint for reform.  The President has long called for partners from both sides of the aisle.  And he has lamented the absence of partners from the other side of the aisle.  It used to be a bipartisan pursuit, comprehensive immigration reform.  For a while it ceased to be.  But he certainly hopes that it will be in the future.  And the reports about Senator Rubio's ideas bode well for a productive bipartisan debate, which we hope will start in earnest soon after the inauguration.  We hope that it signals a change in the Republican approach to this issue, because if we are going to get this done it's going to take more than just a handful of Republicans working across the aisle.  It's the kind of thing -- comprehensive immigration reform -- that requires significant bipartisan support.  And he hopes that this augers well for the future. 
 
Q    But why rely on reports and what you hope he's thinking?  Why not pick up the phone and call Marco Rubio?
 
:  Well, you're suggesting that we won't?
 
Q    Or any Republican on immigration.
 
:  There is no question that as we move forward with immigration reform, comprehensive immigration reform, that it will involve engagement with Democrats and Republicans.  And you can expect that that will happen. 
 
Again, to my knowledge, Senator Rubio has yet to put anything on paper, or draw up any legislation.  We welcome reports of his positions and look forward to working with him and other Republicans in pursuit of comprehensive immigration reform because it's the right thing to do for the country and the President considers it a high priority.
 
Bill.
 
Q    As we've seen in the first term, it's difficult for Congress to move on two sort of complicated issues at the same time, and the President wants to push on immigration and on gun violence.  And I'm wondering how he prioritizes the two.  Is there one that he wants the Senate to take up first over the other?  Is there one he thinks is more important or more urgent for the American people?
 
:  Well, when we talk about efforts to reduce gun violence, we're talking not just about legislative action.  And when it comes to legislative action, the President has already identified things that Congress is actively considering, either the legislation exists or is being worked on.  And he calls on Congress to act right away on the measures that he believes are important -- the assault weapons ban, a measure to deal with high-capacity magazine clips, a measure to close loopholes in our background check system.
 
There is no doubt that we will move very quickly.  I think I just made clear in the statement I read that he expects to move very quickly on immigration after the inauguration.  And I think that while what you say is true about the capacity of Congress to move forward on things, I think there is no reason to believe that these kinds of issues can't be worked on at the same time.  And you can expect the President to push for both measures to reduce gun violence and for comprehensive immigration reform because they are both priorities of his. 
 
Q    Speaking of the members of Congress, you're going to have lawmakers down here for the event tomorrow, I assume. 
 
:  I have only for you that there will be kids who wrote letters to the President and their families.
 
Q    No lawmakers?
 
:  Well, I have no other attendees to announce.
 
Q    Jay, also on gun control or the gun issue, you mentioned the prospect for ongoing conversations with all of the stakeholders.  Given the NRA's response very shortly after the meeting with Vice President Biden, do they have -- do you see any dialogue between the White House and them going forward?
 
:  Well, I think that it's obviously up to each organization or group that wants to engage in this issue in a constructive way, and we are certainly open to engaging, as has been demonstrated by the Vice President's effort thus far, with a broad range of interested groups.  And that will certainly continue to be the case going forward.  And I think it will likely continue to be the case when Congress is considering specific pieces of legislation.
 
But my point was that this is more than an issue between the administration and Congress, more than an issue between elected representatives from both parties.  This is a broader national issue that requires a conversation to continue about gun violence in our country, gun violence in our culture.  And I think the President believes that tomorrow is not the end of something, it's the beginning of something.
 
Q    Well, given their rejection to everything that was discussed at that table with the Vice President, do you see any role for them?
 
:  Again, I'm not going to -- each organization or group that has an interest in this issue will have to decide for itself how much it wants to engage constructively in pursuit of common-sense measures to reduce gun violence.  I'm certainly not going to speak for one organization or the other.
 
Mike, and then Olivier.
 
Q    Two matters if you'll indulge me, the first one a foreign affairs issue.  The American pastor that's being put on trial in Iran, Saeed Abedini -- has the President been kept apprised of his situation?  He's supposed to be going before Iran's “hanging judge” and do you have a statement on this case?
 
:  I don't have a statement.  I'll have to take the question.  The President is obviously updated on a variety of issues with regards to Iran, but I don't have anything specific for you on that.  I'll take the question.
 
Q    And on the gun issue, I wanted to bring up something that you brought up a couple briefings ago, the President brought up on the day of the shooting, and that is the ATF director.  Obviously, it's been a longstanding open position, but in terms of the nominee the President put forward, the ranking Republican in the Senate, Charles Grassley, on the Judiciary Committee, said that the main reason that he's not moving is they haven't been given the documents that they've asked for, answers to questions that they've asked for.  Where does the White House see the holdup on that nomination?
 
:  Well, I think that it's a simple fact that it's been a very long time since the Senate has confirmed a head of the ATF and it needs to act.  I'll have to take the question on the specific issues that are in dispute here about why that hasn't moved, but I think usually the case when -- usually when there's a case of nominations being held up and congressional inaction, the problem is often with Congress.  But we will certainly -- I will take that question.
 
Q    Then let me just redirect that a little bit.  Where do you see that fitting in to the problem that we have with gun violence -- the lack of an ATF director?  What shortcomings does that leave in the federal law enforcement?
 
:  Well, I think an agency with the responsibilities that ATF has that has lacked a confirmed leader for the amount of time that it does I think reflects the lack of necessary focus on these problems.  It's hard to measure what the impact of that absence has been, but it's hard to imagine how it would be positive.
 
Olivier.
 
Q    Jay, a couple for you, one on Mali.  You said that the President is considering a request for logistical help.  Does that request as currently written put American servicemen and women in harm's way?
 
:  We are not contemplating that kind of action.  We are talking about logistical support, providing intelligence assistance.  This is aid and assistance to an effort that the French are undertaking.  I think Secretary Panetta has spoken to this.  He's traveling in Europe, but I think he spoke to this in the last few hours.  But that's the nature of what we're considering here, logistical support.
 
Q    -- drones?
 
:  I think you may be referring to a question from a leader of another country.  But again, the logistical support we're talking about here is of the nature I described -- refueling, that kind of thing.
 
Q    And on a separate subject.  I'm sure that you guys were thrilled that Senator Schumer came out strongly in favor of the Hagel nomination.  But I'm wondering how you feel about his assessment that Israel is in “a dramatically more endangered position” than it was when the President took office?
 
:  Well, I don't -- you'd have to flesh out the context there.  I think that we certainly welcome the statement from Senator Schumer, statement from Senator Boxer, other senators who have come out in support of Senator Hagel's nomination, and we believe that represents momentum behind Senator Hagel's nomination.  And we look forward to the confirmation proceedings continuing.
 
Again, I'm not sure -- you have to give me the context of --
 
Q    Sure.  Well, he talks about how Senator Hagel -- cast some of his past comments about Israel and about Iran as basically statements from that era and things have changed.  I can try to pull the actual full Schumer statement.  I don't know how productive that is, but he says that Senator Hagel expressed -- here we go, I got it --
 
:  Wonders of technology.  (Laughter.)
 
Q    “Senator Hagel realizes that the situation in the Middle East has changed, with Israel in a dramatically more endangered position than it was even five years ago.”
 
:  Well, I don't want to embellish on what Senator Schumer said.  There is no question that -- let's talk about Iran -- that Iran is recognized as a threat to Israel.  And we certainly see it that way.  That is why the President has pursued a policy that has put unprecedented pressure on Iran, unprecedented sanctions on Iran, a sanctions regime with international cooperation that has led to -- had a dramatic impact on Iran's economy, and why the President has made clear that it is his policy that Iran cannot obtain a nuclear weapon. 
 
I think that what is also clear is that this President believes deeply in the unshakable bond between the United States and Israel and our absolute commitment to Israel's defense.  And that is a commitment that Senator Hagel -- hopefully, Secretary Hagel -- shares. 
 
Andrei.
 
Q    Thank you, Jay.  Jay, I keep reading things about the U.S.-Russian relations that, frankly, surprise me.
 
:  In your press or ours?  (Laughter.) 
 
Q    In both.  But I'm here to cover the U.S., so I'm reading the American press.  And I'm reading how the relations are supposedly at their lowest point.  Yesterday, I think the Post referred to a "poisonous unraveling" of relations.  And sometimes, I have the feeling that the writers sort of present it as if coming from the top of the administration, from the White House.  So my question to you is does the White House see it that way?
 
:  Well, I think you would be misinterpreting I think -- I'm not sure which reports you're reading.  It wouldn't be the first time that a writer maybe exaggerated the level of his or her sourcing.  (Laughter.) 
 
Here's what I would tell you.  The President believes that our relationship with Russia is very important.  We have worked cooperatively together since he took office across a spectrum of issues that have benefited both Russia and the United States.  It is also the case that we have disagreements.  One of the developments that's important in our relationship with Russia is that when we have disagreements we're very clear about them, but we do not let them get in the way of necessarily the areas of cooperation that we have pursued.
 
I think that the idea that our relationship -- I mean, you and I are old enough and have been around long enough to know that any characterization like that is ridiculous given the relationship at least between the Soviet Union and the United States and I think different periods even since the collapse of the Soviet Union.
 
We continue to work cooperatively with Russia.  It's a very important relationship.  We are very clear-eyed, as I think the Russians are, about where we disagree, and very aggressive in working with Russia on areas where we do agree and where we can achieve goals, shared goals together, both in the international arena and in our bilateral relationship.
 
Q    I understand that Mr. Donilon is planning a visit to Russia soon.  Can you tell us anything about that?
 
:  I don't have any scheduling or trip announcements to make on behalf of the National Security Advisor. 
Q    Jay, looking ahead to this weekend, can you walk us through the Sunday private swearing-in?  How is that going to unfold?  Who is going to be here and what time is it?
 
:  He will be sworn in -- the President will be sworn in prior to noon in the Residence, in the Blue Room, by Chief Justice Roberts.  The attendees will be immediate family.  There will be full live pool coverage.  And he will be sworn in on two Bibles, as I think has been reported -- the Abraham Lincoln Bible that he used at his swearing-in four years ago, as well as a Martin Luther King Bible on top of that.  So those are the details.
 
Q    Now, the Inaugural Committee said he was going to use the two Bibles at the Capitol, but he's using a Robinson family Bible --
 
:  I will have to check.  I thought he was using both Bibles here as well.  Let me check that for you. 
 
Q    This thing is only going to take, like, five minutes, then, right?  Is there anything else?
 
:  I would not expect a pre-inaugural speech.  (Laughter.)  Again, this will be -- everyone understands the reason why it's happening on Sunday and then the bigger event on Monday.  And there will be full pool coverage of that event.  I think you're right that it's not likely to take very long.
 
Q    Can you post a clarification on the -- a verification on the Bible?*
 
:  Sure.  I mean, obviously PIC has the details, too.  But we will post a clarification.
 
David.
 
Q    Jay, the President deployed U.S. troops to Somalia last weekend with the French on a rescue mission.  Taking that into context, again, with the request of the French for help in Mali, does this represent an expanding front in the war on terrorism for U.S. forces?  And what is the President's criteria going forward to provide aid in these kind of situations?
 
:  Well, let's be clear that, with regards to Somalia, on January 11th, French forces conducted an operation in Somalia in which they attempted to rescue a French citizen being held hostage by Al-Shabaab.  Our forces provided limited technical support to the French forces in that operation, but took no direct part in the assault on the compound where it was believed that the French citizen was being held hostage. 
 
U.S. combat aircraft briefly entered Somali airspace to support the rescue operation if needed.  These aircraft did not employ weapons during the operation.  Because the U.S. combat aircraft entered Somali airspace, the President provided a report to the Congress on the operation, in keeping with the War Powers Resolution. 
 
On your broader question about our approach to these matters, we obviously work with our allies in an effort to deal with al Qaeda and its affiliates around the world and around both the Middle East, in North Africa, and elsewhere.  The operation that the French have undertaken in Mali is one that we support, but it is a French operation.
 
We have, as you know, been focused not only on al Qaeda central -- which is the reason why we went to war in Afghanistan, was to disrupt, dismantle and defeat al Qaeda central -- in that region because al Qaeda launched an attack against the United States on September 11th, 2001, that took thousands of American lives.  We have discussed our efforts in Yemen and elsewhere because those organizations -- al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula represent a direct threat to the American homeland, a direct threat to American citizens. 
 
More broadly speaking, when you talk about other al Qaeda affiliates or other similarly inclined terrorist organizations, we work with our allies around the world to assist their efforts to deprive terrorists of safe havens, or deal with terrorist organizations that represent threats, in the case of Mali to French citizens.  AQIM -- in Mali -- has taken a number of French citizens hostage, for example.  So we work with allies like France in that effort.
 
Q    Is the U.S. doing anything about the reported movement of arms from Libya into Mali?
 
:  I would address that question to State or Defense.  I can look into it as well, but I don't have anything for you on that.
 
Q    Thanks, Jay.
 
:  I'll take one more.  Cheryl, way in the back.
 
Q    Thanks, Jay.  Is Denis McDonough going to be the next White House Chief of Staff?
 
:  That's an easy one.  I have no personnel announcements to make -- (laughter) -- from the podium today.  Thank you all very much.
 
Q    One follow-up?
 
:  Yes, one follow-up.  Oh, wait, a different person, Donovan.  Okay.
 
Q    Sorry.
 
  That's okay.
 
Q    We're just a few days away from the second term starting, and there are four Cabinet officials that have yet to announce their plans, including the Secretaries of Energy and Interior and Transportation.  When can we expect to know that?  I mean, it seems we're getting right up to the end here.
 
Q    I have no personnel announcements to make.  I think you can expect, broadly speaking, the President to make announcements when he's ready to make them with appropriate haste, but also with the appropriate amount of consideration.  In other words, no answer.  (Laughter.)
 
Thanks.

  Good afternoon, everybody.  Please have a seat.  A little more than four years ago, I stood with Mr. Tim Geithner and announced him as my first nominee to my Cabinet.  We were barely two months into the financial crisis.  The stock market had cratered.  The housing market had cratered as well.  Bank after bank was on the verge of collapse.  And worst of all, more than 800,000 Americans would lose their jobs in just that month.  And the bottom was not yet in sight.

So I couldn't blame Tim when he tried to tell me he wasn't the right guy for the job.  (Laughter.)  But I knew that Tim's extensive experience with economic policy made him eminently qualified, and I also knew that he could hit the ground running.  As Chairman of the New York Federal Reserve, he had just spent several sleepless and chaotic weeks immersed in the complexities of the crisis, and had been working closely with his Republican predecessor at Treasury to save the financial system.

Then, with the wreckage of our economy still smoldering and unstable, I asked Tim to help put it back together.  And thanks in large part to his steady hand, our economy has been growing again for the past three years, our businesses have created nearly 6 million new jobs.  The money that we spent to save the financial system has largely been paid back.  We've put in place rules to prevent that kind of financial meltdown from ever happening again.  An auto industry was saved.  We made sure taxpayers are not on the hook if the biggest firms fail again.  We've taken steps to help underwater homeowners come up for air, and open new markets to sell American goods overseas.  And we've begun to reduce our deficit through a balanced mix of spending cuts and reforms to a tax code that at the time that we both came in was too skewed in favor of the wealthy at the expense of middle-class Americans.

So when the history books are written, Tim Geithner is going to go down as one of our finest Secretaries of the Treasury.  (Applause.)

All right, don't embarrass him.  (Laughter.) 

On a personal note, Tim has been a wonderful friend and a dependable advisor throughout these last four years.  There's an unofficial saying over at Treasury -- “no peacocks, no jerks, no whiners.”  That would be a good saying for all of Washington -- (laughter) -- "no peacocks, no jerks, no whiners."  Few embody that ideal better than Tim Geithner.  That's why, when Tim was thinking about leaving a couple of years ago -- (laughter) -- I had to personally get on my knees with Carole to help convince him to stay on a little bit longer.  And I could not be more grateful to Carole and the entire Geithner family for allowing him to make the sacrifices that so many of our Cabinet members ask of their families in serving the country.

The fact is, while a lot of work remains, especially to rebuild a strong middle class and offer working folks new pathways to rise into the middle class, our economy is better positioned for tomorrow than most of those other countries hit by the financial crisis.  The tough decisions Tim made and carried out deserve a lot of credit for that.  So I understand that Tim is ready for a break.  Obviously, we're sad to see him go.  But I cannot think of a better person to continue Tim's work at Treasury than Jack Lew.

This is bittersweet not only because Tim is leaving, but also because Jack has been my Chief of Staff for the last year.  He was my budget director before that.  I trust his judgment.  I value his friendship.  I know very few people with greater integrity than the man to my left.  And so I don't want to see him go because it's working out really well for me to have him here in the White House.  But my loss will be the nation's gain. 

Jack has the distinction of having worked -- and succeeded -- in some of the toughest jobs in Washington and the private sector.  As a congressional staffer in the 1980s, he helped negotiate the deal between President Reagan and Tip O'Neill to save Social Security.  Under President Clinton, he presided over three budget surpluses in a row.  So for all the talk out there about deficit reduction, making sure our books are balanced, this is the guy who did it -- three times.  He helped oversee one of our nation's finest universities and one of our largest investment banks. 

In my administration, he has managed operations for the State Department and the budget for the entire executive branch.  And over the past year, I've sought Jack's advice on virtually every decision that I've made, from economic policy to foreign policy.

One reason Jack has been so effective in this town is because he is a low-key guy who prefers to surround himself with policy experts rather than television cameras.  And over the years, he's built a reputation as a master of policy who can work with members of both parties and forge principled compromises. 

And maybe most importantly, as the son of a Polish immigrant, a man of deep and devout faith, Jack knows that every number on a page, every dollar we budget, every decision we make has to be an expression of who we wish to be as a nation, our values.  The values that say everybody gets a fair shot at opportunity and says that we expect all of us to fulfill our individual obligations as citizens in return.  So Jack has my complete trust.  I know I'm not alone in that. 

In the words of one former senator, “Having Lew on your team is the equivalent as a coach of having the luxury of putting somebody at almost any position and knowing he will do well.”  And I could not agree more.  So I hope the Senate will confirm him as quickly as possible. 

I want to personally thank both of these men and their families, especially Carole and Ruth, for their extraordinary service to our country.

And with that, I'd like to invite them to say a few words, starting with Tim. 

SECRETARY GEITHNER:  Mr. President, it's been a privilege to serve you.  I'm honored and grateful that you asked me to do this, really I am.  And I'm very proud of what my colleagues at Treasury and your economic team was able to help you accomplish these first four years. 

When you stepped into this building as President, you were confronted with a world in crisis, the worst crisis in generations.  And you made the necessary, the hard, the politically perilous choices that saved the American people, saved American industry, saved the global economy from a failing financial system.  And your successful response to the crisis of course did not solve all the nation's challenges.  It could not have done so.  But the actions you took along with those of a forceful and creative Federal Reserve have made the country stronger and have put us in a much better position to face the many challenges still ahead of us -- and they are many.

I have the greatest respect for Jack Lew.  I know him as a man of exceptional judgment, calm under pressure, with an extraordinary record of accomplishment and experience over decades spent at the center of American economic policy.  He's committed to defending the safety net for the elderly and the poor.  He understands what it takes to create the conditions for stronger economic growth and broader economic opportunity.  And he understands that to govern responsibly is to govern with a recognition that we have limited fiscal resources. 

Now, like Jack, I've spent my professional life in this world of public policy and public service.  And as all of you know, our families carry a large share of the burdens we assume in public life.  And I feel incredibly fortunate that my wife Carole and my family have been willing to allow me to do this.  And I thank them for their support and their patience.  And I understand their occasional impatience.  (Laughter.)

I want to express my admiration and my appreciation for the women and the men of the Treasury Department.  Those who came to serve you these years of crisis and the civil servants of the Treasury with whom I first started working in 1988, they are exceptionally talented and honorable public servants.  I'm very proud of what they have helped you accomplish.  And I am confident that my successor will find them the extraordinary asset they are to the nation.

And I also hope that Americans will look at the challenges we face today and decide, as many of you in this room have, that in spite of the divisive state of our political system today that serving your country is compelling and rewarding work.  That was my experience, and I am grateful and will always be grateful to you for having given me the opportunity to serve you as the 75th Secretary of the Treasury.  (Applause.)

MR. LEW:  Mr. President, it has been my honor to serve as your Chief of Staff and before that at OMB and the State Department.  It's really been a privilege to come to work every day as part of a team that's dedicated to building a sound economy and a safer world.

Tim, you have been a friend and a colleague for many years -- actually, decades -- and the American people are better off for your outstanding service.  And I thought I knew you pretty well, but it was only yesterday that I discovered that we both share a common challenge with penmanship.  (Laughter.)  Tim, I join the President and everyone here in wishing you and Carole and your whole family well.

As a kid growing up in Queens, I had dreams of making a difference in the world.  These dreams were nurtured in a home where the gifts of American freedom and opportunity were cherished and never taken for granted, and the responsibility to engage in issues of public concern were part of daily life.  I will always be grateful to my parents for grounding me in the values that have remained central to my personal and professional life.

I grew up professional in the office of Speaker O'Neill, whose compass was always clear and who demanded unvarnished advice on how best to reach the desired destination.  Mr. O'Neill cared little about your age or rank, and only about whether or not you did the hard work to inform the decisions of the day.  And he took a big chance giving a lot of responsibility to a very young man, and for that I'll always be thankful.

Serving at OMB first under President Clinton and more recently in this administration, I worked with one of the finest teams in the government to execute a responsible fiscal policy while advancing policies to promote economic growth.  I'm delighted to see so many of my friends from OMB here today. 

At the State Department, I worked closely with our great Secretary of State and my friend, Hillary Clinton, to advance our nation's national security agenda, including our international economic policies.

And as Chief of Staff, I've had the pleasure of working with a tremendously talented White House team, which manages policy, politics, communications, and complex operations every day with grace, skill, and loyalty. 

If confirmed, I look forward to joining the Treasury Department, whose people are legendary for their skill and knowledge.  It's a team that I've collaborated with closely over many years and have come to respect greatly.

Finally, thank you to Ruth, Shoshi, Danny, Zahava, and the kids for your endless tolerance with the demands of a schedule that tests all family patience.  And thank you, Mr. President, for your trust, your confidence, and friendship.  Serving in your administration has allowed me to live out those values my parents instilled in me, and I look forward to continuing with the challenges ahead.  (Applause.)

  These are two outstanding public servants.  I think the only point that I want to make -- leave you with is the fact that I had never noticed Jack's signature -- (laughter) -- and when this was highlighted yesterday in the press, I considered rescinding -- (laughter) -- my offer to appoint him.  Jack assures me that he is going to work to make at least one letter legible -- (laughter) -- in order not to debase our currency should he be confirmed as Secretary of the Treasury.

Thank you very much, everybody.  (Applause.)

  Good afternoon, everybody.  Please have a seat.  As President and Commander-in-Chief, my most solemn obligation is the security of the American people.  Over the past four years, we've met that responsibility by ending the war in Iraq, and beginning a transition in Afghanistan; by decimating the al Qaeda core and taking out Osama bin Laden; by disrupting terrorist plots and saving countless American lives. 

Among an outstanding national security team, I am especially grateful to Leon Panetta, who has led the CIA and our military with incredible skill.  Leon, after nearly five decades of service, you have more than earned the right to return to civilian life.  I'll have much more to say about Leon's distinguished service in the days ahead.  Today, I simply want to convey both to you and to Sylvia the eternal gratitude of the entire nation.  Thank you so much, Leon.

I also want to thank Michael Morell, who has earned the admiration of all of us who've worked with him across government and here in the White House.  In moments of transition, he's guided the CIA with a steady hand as Acting Director -- not once, but twice.  And he is a consummate professional.  As I said, everybody in the White House who works with him, everybody across agencies who works with him considers him truly to be one of our most outstanding national security team members.  And so, Michael, on behalf of all of us, thank you and Mary Beth for your continued service.  

As these leaders know, the work of protecting our nation is never done, and we've still got much to do:  Ending the war in Afghanistan and caring for those who have borne the battle; preparing for the full range of threats, from the unconventional to the conventional, including things like cyber security; and within our military, continuing to ensure that our men and women in uniform can serve the country they love, no matter who they love.

To help meet the challenges of our time, I'm proud to announce my choice for two key members of my national security team -- Chuck Hagel for Secretary of Defense and John Brennan for Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.

Chuck Hagel is the leader that our troops deserve.  He is an American patriot.  He enlisted in the Army and volunteered for Vietnam.  As a young private, and then a sergeant, he served with honor, alongside his own brother.  When Chuck was hit by shrapnel, his brother saved him.  When his brother was injured by a mine, Chuck risked his life to pull him to safety.  To this day, Chuck bears the scars -- and the shrapnel -- from the battles he fought in our name.

Chuck Hagel's leadership of our military would be historic.  He'd be the first person of enlisted rank to serve as Secretary of Defense, one of the few secretaries who have been wounded in war, and the first Vietnam veteran to lead the department.  As I saw during our visits together to Afghanistan and Iraq, in Chuck Hagel our troops see a decorated combat veteran of character and strength.  They see one of their own.

Chuck is a champion of our troops and our veterans and our military families.  As a leader at the VA, he fought to give our veterans the benefits they deserved.  As head of the USO, he devoted himself to caring for our troops.  Having studied under the GI Bill himself, he helped lead the fight for the Post-9/11 GI Bill so today's returning heroes can get their education, too.  Having co-chaired my Intelligence Advisory Board, he knows that our armed forces collect, analyze, and depend on good intelligence.

And Chuck recognizes that American leadership is indispensable in a dangerous world.  I saw this in our travels together across the Middle East.  He understands that America stands strongest when we stand with allies and with friends.  As a successful businessman, he also knows that even as we make tough fiscal choices, we have to do so wisely, guided by our strategy, and keep our military the strongest fighting force the world has ever known.

Maybe most importantly, Chuck knows that war is not an abstraction.  He understands that sending young Americans to fight and bleed in the dirt and mud, that's something we only do when it's absolutely necessary.  “My frame of reference,” he has said, is “geared towards the guy at the bottom who's doing the fighting and the dying.”  With Chuck, our troops will always know, just like Sergeant Hagel was there for his own brother, Secretary Hagel will be there for you.

And finally, Chuck represents the bipartisan tradition that we need more of in Washington.  For his independence and commitment to consensus, he's earned the respect of national security and military leaders, Republicans and Democrats -- including me.  In the Senate, I came to admire his courage and his judgment, his willingness to speak his mind -- even if it wasn't popular, even if it defied the conventional wisdom.

And that's exactly the spirit I want on my national security team -- a recognition that when it comes to the defense of our country, we are not Democrats or Republicans; we are Americans.  Each of us has a responsibility, Chuck has said, to be guided not by the interest of our party or our President even, but by “the interests of our country.” 

So, Chuck, I thank you and Lilibet for agreeing to serve once more in the interests of our country.

Now, when I'm on the subject of patriots, let me say a few words about John Brennan.  In John Brennan, the men and women of the CIA will have the leadership of one of our nation's most skilled and respected intelligence professionals -- not to mention that unique combination of smarts and strength that he claims comes from growing up in New Jersey.  (Laughter.)  

A 25-year veteran of the CIA, John knows what our national security demands -- intelligence that provides policymakers with the facts, strong analytic insights, and a keen understanding of a dynamic world.  Given his extensive experience and travels -- which include, by the way, traveling through the Arabian Peninsula where he camped with tribesmen in the desert -- John has an invaluable perspective on the forces -- the history, the culture, the politics, economics, the desire for human dignity driving so much of the changes in today's world.   

Having held senior management, analytic, and operational positions at the agency, John is committed to investing in the range of intelligence capabilities we need -- technical and human.  He literally built -- and then led -- the National Counterterrorism Center.  And he knows the risks that our intelligence professionals face every day.  John has lost colleagues and friends -- heroes whose stars now grace that memorial wall at Langley. 

For the last four years, as my Advisor for Counterterrorism and Homeland Security, John developed and has overseen our comprehensive counterterrorism strategy -- a collaborative effort across the government, including intelligence and defense and homeland security, and law enforcement agencies. 

And so think about the results.  More al Qaeda leaders and commanders have been removed from the battlefield than at any time since 9/11.  Their communications, recruiting, training, finances are all under enormous strain -- all of which makes it harder to plan and carry out large-scale attacks against our homeland.  And our entire team, including our exceptional Director of National Intelligence, Jim Clapper, will remain relentless against al Qaeda and its affiliates. 

In all this work, John has been tireless.  People here in the White House work hard.  But John is legendary, even in the White House, for working hard.  (Laughter.)  He is one of the hardest-working public servants I've ever seen.  I'm not sure he's slept in four years.  (Laughter.)  When I was on Martha's Vineyard, John came and did the press briefing -- this is in summer, it's August, he's in full suit and tie.  And one of the reporters asked him, don't you ever get any down time?  And John said, “I don't do down time.”  (Laughter.)  He's not even smiling now.  (Laughter.) 

There's another reason I value John so much, and that is his integrity and his commitment to the values that define us as Americans.  He has worked to embed our efforts in a strong legal framework.  He understands we are a nation of laws.  In moments of debate and decision, he asks the tough question and he insists on high and rigorous standards.  Time and again, he's spoken to the American people about our counterterrorism policies because he recognizes we have a responsibility to be [as] open and transparent as possible.

And so, John, you've been one of my closest advisors.  You've been a great friend.  I am deeply grateful for your extraordinary service.  I'm even more grateful for Kathy's willingness to put up with you.  And I'm grateful to both of you for your willingness to take this assignment. 

Today, I can say to the men and women of the CIA:  In Director John Brennan you will have one of your own; a leader who knows you; who cares for you, deeply; and who will fight for you every single day.  And you'll have a leader who has my complete confidence and my complete trust. 

As I said, the work of defending our nation is never done.  My number-one criteria in making these decisions was simple -- who is going to do the best job in securing America.  These two leaders have dedicated their lives to protecting our country.  I'm confident they will do an outstanding job.  I urge the Senate to confirm them as soon as possible so we can keep our nation secure and the American people safe. 

And so, Chuck and John -- congratulations.

And with that, I want to invite each of these leaders on stage to say a few words, starting with Mr. Leon Panetta.

SECRETARY PANETTA:  First of all, let me express my deepest gratitude to the President for giving me the honor and the privilege of serving in your administration these last four years as Director of the CIA and now as Secretary of Defense.  I have been extremely proud to be part of your national security team, Mr. President, and to be proud of what it has accomplished in your first term. 

Looking ahead to the second term, I want to commend President Obama on his decision to nominate Chuck Hagel as the next Secretary of the Defense.  And let me also add, as former Director of the CIA, to commend the President for his choice of John Brennan.  I have had the opportunity to work with John on counterterrorism issues these last four years.  He knows the CIA.  He will be a strong leader of that great intelligence agency. 

I've also known Chuck for a long period of time as well, and I had the opportunity to work with him closely -- particularly in his capacity as Chairman of the President's Intelligence Advisory Board.  I greatly appreciate the work he has done to strengthen our intelligence enterprise.  It has been extremely important to our ability to improve our intelligence capabilities.  And as Secretary of Defense, I also benefited from his work when he served on our Defense Policy Board. 

Chuck Hagel is a patriot, he's a decorated combat veteran, and he is a dedicated public servant.  I believe his experience, his judgment, his deep understanding of the security issues facing this country make him the right choice to be Secretary of Defense.

As for me, after close to 50 years of serving the American people -- began in 1964 when I served as a first lieutenant in the United States Army, and then in both the legislative and executive branch positions in Washington -- the time has come for me to return to my wife Sylvia, our three sons, their families, our six grandchildren, and my walnut farm -- (laughter) -- dealing with a different set of nuts.  (Laughter.) 

I want to deeply thank my family for giving me the fullest measure of love and support during my many absences from home throughout my long career in public service.  But I will leave Washington with a very deep sense of pride in what we have accomplished during these last four years being on the President's national security team. 

As both Director of the CIA and as Secretary of Defense, I have always believed that our fundamental mission is to keep America safe, to keep America secure.  And because of the outstanding dedication of our intelligence and military professionals, America is safer and more secure than it was four years ago, and we have reached a turning point after more than a decade of war.

And on that, as we've reached that turning point, we've developed a new defense strategy for the 21st century.  We have, with John's leadership, decimated al Qaeda's leadership and weakened their effort to attack this country.  We have brought wars in Iraq and we will bring the war in Afghanistan to an honorable conclusion.  We've opened up opportunities for all Americans to serve in our military.  And we continue to strongly support our forces, their families, and our wounded warriors.  These are some of the achievements that I am proud of.

Let me close by expressing my profound gratitude to the outstanding team of military and civilian staff and leaders that I've had the honor to serve with at the Department of Defense and at the White House.  In particular, let me deeply thank the outstanding men and women in uniform, who I've had the privilege to serve and to lead, those who put their lives on the line every day on distant battlefields for this country.  Their sacrifices teach us that freedom is not free; a strong democracy depends on a strong defense.  But you can also not have a strong and stable defense without a strong and stable democracy.

As we continue to confront strategic challenges and fiscal austerity, my hope for the future is that the sense of duty our servicemembers and their families exhibit every day inspires the leaders of this nation to have the courage to do what is right, to achieve the American Dream, to give our children a better life, and to build a more secure future.

SENATOR HAGEL:  Thank you, Mr. President.  I'm honored by your trust and your confidence in me, and not unmindful of the immense responsibilities that go with it.  I want to also acknowledge my wife, Lilibet; my daughter, Allyn; and our son, Ziller, who is in Chicago today, we hope, back attending his first day of classes at DePaul University.  (Laughter.)

And to my friend, Leon Panetta, thank you for your extraordinary service to our country over so many years in so many capacities.  You are one of the premier public servants of our time.  To follow you at the Department of Defense will be a most challenging task, but I will try to live up to the standards that you, Bob Gates and others have set for this job and this nation. 

Let me also express my deep appreciation and congratulations to my friend, John Brennan, and to also acknowledge the President's confidence and trust in John Brennan.  Thank you, John, for your service and what you will continue to do for our country.  To Mike Morell -- who I have gotten to know over the years not just serving on the Senate Intelligence Committee, but also, as the President has noted, the privilege of co-chairing the President's Intelligence Advisory Board with former Senator Dave Boren -- thank you, Mike, for your continued service.

Mr. President, I am grateful for this opportunity to serve our country again and especially its men and women in uniform and their families.  These are people who give so much to this nation every day with such dignity and selflessness.  This is particularly important at a time as we complete our mission in Afghanistan and support the troops and military families who have sacrificed so much over more than a decade of war. 

I'm also grateful for an opportunity to help continue to strengthen our country and strengthen our country's alliances, and advance global freedom, decency, and humanity as we help build a better world for all mankind.  I will always do my best.  I will do my best for our country, for those I represent at the Pentagon, and for all our citizens.  And, Mr. President, I will always give you my honest and most informed counsel.  Thank you very much. 

ACTING DIRECTOR MORELL:  Mr. President, thank you for your very kind remarks, and thank you for the trust that you placed in me when you asked me to be Acting Director twice. 

I have had the honor of knowing and working with John Brennan for the last 20 years.  We have worked particularly closely the last three years.  John Brennan is a intelligence professional with deep experience in our business, a public servant with extraordinary dedication, and a man of deep integrity.  With Senate confirmation, I know that he will be an outstanding Director of the Central Intelligence Agency. 

As the President noted, John started his career at CIA and spent nearly a quarter century.  So this is a homecoming for John. 

John, on behalf of the talented and dedicated men and women of CIA, it is my deep honor to say, welcome home.

MR. BRENNAN:  Mr. President, it is indeed a tremendous honor to be nominated to be the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.  The women and men of the CIA are among the most dedicated, courageous, selfless and hardworking individuals who have ever served this country.  At great personal risk and sacrifice, they have made countless invaluable contributions to our national security and to the safety and security of all Americans.  Most times, their successes will never be known outside the hallowed halls of Langley and the Oval Office.

Leading the agency in which I served for 25 years would be the greatest privilege as well as the greatest responsibility of my professional life.  Mr. President, I want to thank you for your confidence in me, but even more for your confidence and constant support to the CIA and to those who serve in the intelligence community.  They need and deserve the support of all of their fellow Americans, especially at a time of such tremendous national security challenges.

If confirmed as Director, I will make it my mission to ensure that the CIA has the tools it needs to keep our nation safe, and that its work always reflects the liberties, the freedoms and the values that we hold so dear.

I'm especially proud to stand here today with such patriots as Leon Panetta, Chuck Hagel and Michael Morell.  It was a tremendous honor to serve with Leon over the past four years, and I very much look forward to the opportunity and privilege to serve with another of America's great patriots, Chuck Hagel.

And I am especially proud and touched to be able to stand here today with my close friend and colleague, Michael Morell, who epitomizes what it means to be an intelligence professional.  Michael's leadership at the CIA, as well as his 32-year career, has been nothing short of exemplary.  Michael, I very much look forward to working with you in the weeks, months, and years ahead.

And I also look forward to working with Congress, as our national security rests on the ability of the executive and legislative branches of our government to work as a team.  While the intelligence profession oftentimes demands secrecy, it is critically important that there be a full and open discourse on intelligence matters with the appropriate elected representatives of the American people.  Although I consider myself neither a Republican nor a Democrat, I very much look forward to working closely with those on both sides of the aisle.

Finally, and most importantly, to my wife Kathy; to my children Kyle, Jaclyn, Kelly; to my parents in New Jersey, a shout-out -- (laughter) -- Owen, who is 92 and my mom, Dorothy, who is 91; my brother Tom and my sister Kathleen and my Jersey roots:  I could not be where I am today without their love, their patience, their understanding and their support.  And there is no way that I can ever repay that, except to say I think I'm going to need it for a little bit longer.  (Laughter.)

So again, Mr. President, I am deeply grateful for this opportunity.  It will be bittersweet to leave all of my close colleagues and friends here at the White House and at the national security staff, who I have come to work with and respect so deeply over the last four years.

But if confirmed by the Senate, I will consider it to be the honor of my life to serve as the 21st Director of the Central Intelligence Agency.

  Well, these are four outstanding individuals.  We are grateful to all of them.  I want, in particular, to thank Mike Morell and Leon Panetta for their extraordinary service.  And I just want to repeat, I hope that the Senate will act on these confirmations promptly.  When it comes to national security, we don't like to leave a lot of gaps between the time that one set of leaders transitions out and another transitions in.  So we need to get moving quickly on this.

The final point I will make:  One of the reasons that I am so confident that Chuck Hagel is going to be an outstanding Secretary of Defense and John Brennan is going to be an outstanding Director of the Central Intelligence Agency is they understand that we are only successful because of the folks up and down the line in these respective institutions -- the folks on the ground who are oftentimes putting their lives at risk for us, and are oftentimes at great remove from Washington and its politics.

To have those who have been in the field, who have been in the heat of battle, who understand the consequences of decisions that we make in this town and how it has an impact and ramifications for everybody who actually has to execute our national security strategies, that's something invaluable.  It will provide me the kinds of insights that I need in making very difficult decisions, but it will also mean that these folks are going to be looking out for the people who work for them.  And that's something that, I think, in these leadership positions is absolutely critical.

So I'm looking forward to working with these two gentlemen.  They are going to be outstanding.

Thank you very much, everybody.  (Applause.)